PyProlog Project Report

Title: PyProlog – Python + Prolog Integration Tool


1. Abstract

PyProlog is a lightweight, single-file Python application that integrates Python with Prolog using the pyswip library. It provides a user-friendly Command Line Interface (CLI) to load a Prolog knowledge base, run logical queries, and dynamically add new facts.
The project uses a family relationship knowledge base as an example to demonstrate the power of logic programming combined with Python scripting. It features rich terminal output using the rich library.

2. Objectives

Integrate Prolog with Python seamlessly
Create an easy-to-use CLI for querying and managing a knowledge base
Demonstrate family relationship inference (father, mother, grandparent, sibling)
Enable dynamic addition of facts at runtime
Provide a simple educational tool for Logic Programming and AI

3. Features

Embedded family relations knowledge base
Support for custom Prolog queries
Predefined commands for common family queries
Dynamic fact assertion (assertz)
Beautiful formatted output with tables and colors
Safe temporary file handling for Prolog code

4. Technologies Used

Python 3
pyswip (Python-Prolog bridge)
SWI-Prolog (Prolog engine)
Typer (CLI framework)
Rich (terminal styling and tables)

Installation:
Bashpip install pyswip typer rich


5. System Design
The application consists of:

A Prolog knowledge base (facts + rules) stored as a string
PyProlog class for managing queries and assertions
Typer-based CLI with commands like q, father, mother, grandparents, siblings, add, and facts

Prolog code is written to a temporary file and consulted at startup.


6. Sample Usage

Bashpython pyprolog.py q "father(X, mary)"
python pyprolog.py father mary
python pyprolog.py grandparents lucas
python pyprolog.py siblings sophia
python pyprolog.py add "parent(alice, dave)"


7. Results & Testing

All predefined queries return correct results
Dynamic facts are successfully added and reflected in queries
Clean error handling for invalid inputs
Rich tables improve readability of query results

8. Limitations & Future Work
Limitations:

Knowledge base is not persistent
Requires SWI-Prolog installed on system

Future Enhancements:

Persistent knowledge base save/load
Web interface (FastAPI/Streamlit)
Advanced family rules (uncle, aunt, cousin)
Support for other domains (diagnosis, scheduling)

9. Conclusion

PyProlog successfully demonstrates hybrid programming by combining Prolog’s logical inference with Python’s flexibility. It serves as an excellent educational tool for students and developers interested in Artificial Intelligence and Logic Programming.
The single-file design makes it simple, portable, and easy to extend.